+++
title = 'Determinism in Buddhist Thinking'
date = '2025-01-09'
math = true
+++
#### Level 3

Here, I'm going to go examine a few ways of proving where **incompatibilist** free will holds in our [truth hierarchy](https://maliknyc.github.io/karmagambler.github.io/posts/post-7/).

It's important to remember that incompatibilism does not entail determinism, but rather that free will and determinism are mutually exclusive. Thus, if we can establish that Buddhism describes determinism at some levels of truth, we can also establish that incompatibilist free will does not hold at those levels. Because Level 4 is based on realization rather than principles and introduces concepts of emptiness that undermine principled analyses of phenomena, exploring determinism – which relies on deductive reasoning – at this level or beyond may not be particularly meaningful. Instead, we should focus on Level 3 truths, which are in themselves based on cause and effect.

Here, perhaps the most apparent sign of determinism in Buddhism is the doctrine of dependent origination (pratītyasamutpāda): the idea that no phenomena exist independently, arise without a cause, or are unconditioned (Tricycle 2023). It, definitionally, almost obviously implies determinism. To be sure, we will still look for holes. Perhaps the most prevalent form of indeterminism is the rejection of determinism in favor of the existence of chance. This chance-based form of indeterminism has roots in Epicureanism, with its concept of the random atomic 'swerve' (Lucretius 2017, 289–293), and Aristotelianism, which recognized chance as a cause of certain events (Aristotle 2017, 17). Over time, it has become nearly synonymous with indeterminism as a whole, largely due to the Copenhagen interpretation's popularization of the idea that quantum events are probabilistically indeterminate (Faye 2024). Although the Buddha seemingly discouraged the reliance on luck, it's less clear whether he, along with other seminal Buddhist philosophers, explicitly rejected the existence of chance (Dhammika 1996). However, by thinking through the implications of dependent origination, we can deduce an answer to whether Buddhism allows for probabilistic indeterminism.

Let's consider a framework where \( A \) represents all current conditions that can influence an outcome, and \( C \) is the collection of all possible, mutually exclusive outcomes (each of which represents a resulting reality). \( B \) then represents every possible combination of conditions from \( A \). According to dependent origination, each outcome in \( C \) must be entirely determined by some combination within \( B \), ensuring that every outcome has a corresponding cause. If \( A \) includes every possible condition without exception, it must follow that each combination in \( B \) accounts for all factors necessary to produce an outcome. Therefore, the mapping from \( B \) to \( C \) must be deterministic, and each combination of conditions must result in exactly one outcome. A counterexample that more clearly illustrates why it must be exactly one outcome is as follows: if a single combination of conditions \( B_i \) could lead to multiple outcomes \( C_1, C_2, \ldots, C_n \) (each with associated probabilities \( p_1, p_2, \ldots, p_n \), where the sum of all probabilities equals one), then if outcome \( C_1 \) occurs, there is no additional cause explaining why outcomes \( C_2 \) through \( C_n \) did not materialize. Similarly, if outcome \( C_2 \) occurs, there is no cause as to why outcomes \( C_1 \) or \( C_3 \) through \( C_n \) did not occur. Remember that probabilities are descriptions not causes in and of themselves: If it's possible for an outcome to "beat the odds," then the odds themselves cannot explain why that outcome materialized over the others. Because our scenario presents outcomes that lack definitive causes, it violates dependent origination. Accordingly, because dependent origination cannot allow variability in the outcome, it leaves no room for true randomness and is incompatible with probabilistic indeterminism. Probabilities can arise in mundane conventional truths, but they only reflect practical representations of known conditions; the conditions within \( A \) are vast and often unobtainable, yet they must exist as Level 3 truths to necessitate the outcomes in \( C \).

If, given a specific set of initial conditions, there is only one possible future history that can unfold, then the universe must have “perfect predictability” – the idea that knowing all relevant conditions and laws of a system at a given moment could allow one to unfailingly predict its exact future state. In turn, if the universe has perfect predictability, it must be deterministic. To understand why it goes both ways here, we can use our previous framework. Let's reframe “perfect predictability” as: Given complete knowledge of all conditions in \( A \), it's possible for one to determine with certainty the exact outcome in \( C \).

Using the exact same counterexample as before,\(^1\) we can reason that if any combination in \( B \) can result in multiple outcomes from \( C \) with varying probabilities, additional, unaccounted-for conditions must exist and be needed to perfectly predict the resulting outcome \( C_i \). Of course, perfect predictability does not imply that we, in practice, could perfectly predict the future. As mentioned, the conditions in \( A \) are practically unattainable, and even if we were able to access them, we would almost certainly lack the understanding of the natural laws and processes needed to deterministically predict an exact future outcome.

This brings us to another angle for tackling the question of Buddhist determinism: examining the nature of the Buddha’s omniscience. If we were able to find that the Buddha’s omniscience entailed perfect predictive ability\(^2\) – the kind that is only possible in a universe with perfect predictability – then we could say the Buddha lived in a deterministic universe. While there is still some ambiguity and contention about the exact nature of the Buddha’s omniscience, there is also ample evidence from Buddhist texts and subsequent scholarly interpretations to suggest that his foresight did align with our concept of perfect predictive ability. In the *Aṅguttara Nikāya*, the Buddha affirms that he knows all that is seen, heard, sensed, and cognized by the humans and deities in the world (Bodhi 2012, 4.24). Here, he is attributing to himself an “omniscience” of everything that all other beings cognize at the present time, but not a special knowledge of the future. The *Tevijjavacchasutta* describes the Buddha’s “threefold knowledge”: the ability to recall past lives in detail, the “divine eye” to see beings passing away and reappearing according to their actions, and the direct realization of liberation (Ñāṇamoli and Bodhi 1995, 588). This also does not ascribe to the Buddha a direct knowledge of the future; rather, it reiterates his profound understanding of all events that have already occurred. Yet, in the *Cūḷasakuludāyisutta*, the Buddha affirms that he can answer any question about the future as well. There, he states that if someone with superhuman clairvoyance asked him about future events, he could satisfy their query. Since this hypothetical interlocutor could presumably verify the correctness of the Buddha’s response, the Buddha is claiming that his answers about the future are perfectly accurate.

Although the *Aṅguttara Nikāya* and *Tevijjavacchasutta* only concretely establish the lower bound of the Buddha’s knowledge, Alexander Berzin proposes a compelling resolution regarding the upper bound by pointing out that, within the Buddhist framework, future phenomena do not already exist waiting somewhere. As such, if there are no existent future phenomena for the Buddha to observe, then the Buddha cannot directly observe the future. Berzin also corroborates that the Buddha’s knowledge of future outcomes is exact, explaining that because the Buddha “can cognize all the causal factors … [he] knows exactly what will ripen from each karmic tendency” (Berzin 2018). If it's true both that the Buddha did not have direct clairvoyance and also that he could perfectly assess future outcomes, then it seems to follow that the Buddha did have perfect predictive ability, which in turn necessitates a deterministic universe. Consequently, we can say that, within the Buddhist framework, incompatibilist free will fails to hold at Level 3.

## Notes
1. That counterexample being where a single combination of conditions Bi could lead to multiple outcomes \(C_1\), \(C_2\), …, \(C_n\), each with associated probabilities \(p_1\), \(p_2\), …, \(p_n\), respectively, such that the sum of all probabilities equals one.
2. If the Buddha had perfect predictive ability as opposed to some *predeterministic* power that grants direct vision into a predetermined future. This is an important distinction: perfect predictability entails strict determinism, not predeterminism – the idea that all future events have already been decided.

# References
**Tricycle.** 2023. *Dependent Origination.* In *Buddhism for Beginners*, an initiative of Tricycle: The Buddhist Review. [https://tricycle.org/beginners/buddhism/dependent-origination/](https://tricycle.org/beginners/buddhism/dependent-origination/).

**Lucretius.** 2017. *On the Nature of Things*. Translated by William Ellery Leonard. [http://data.perseus.org/citations/urn:cts:latinLit:phi0550.phi001.perseus-eng1:2.216-2.293](http://data.perseus.org/citations/urn:cts:latinLit:phi0550.phi001.perseus-eng1:2.216-2.293).

**Aristotle.** 2017. *Physics*. Edited by Gregory Koutrouby. Translated by R. P. Hardie and R. K. Gaye. Mineola, NY: Dover Publications. A republication of the 1930 edition. ISBN 978-0-486-81351-6.

**Faye, Jan.** 2024. "Copenhagen Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics." In *The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy* (Summer 2024 Edition), edited by Edward N. Zalta and Uri Nodelman. [https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/sum2024/entries/qm-copenhagen/](https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/sum2024/entries/qm-copenhagen/).

**Dhammika, S.** 1996. "Good Luck and Fate." In *Good Question, Good Answer*. Buddha Dharma Education Association. [https://www.buddhanet.net/e-learning/qanda09/](https://www.buddhanet.net/e-learning/qanda09/).

**Bodhi, Bhikkhu.** 2012. *The Numerical Discourses of the Buddha: A Translation of the Aṅguttara Nikāya*. Boston: Wisdom Publications. [https://suttacentral.net/an4.24/en/bodhi](https://suttacentral.net/an4.24/en/bodhi).

**Ñāṇamoli, Bhikkhu, and Bhikkhu Bodhi, trans.** 1995. *The Middle Length Discourses of the Buddha: A Translation of the Majjhima Nikāya*. Boston: Wisdom Publications.

**Berzin, Alexander.** 2018. "A Buddha's Omniscience of the Three Times." In *A Buddha's Knowledge of the Past, Present, and Future*. Study Buddhism. Berzin Archives e.V. December 27, 2018. [https://studybuddhism.com/en/advanced-studies/abhidharma-tenet-systems/time-the-universe/a-buddha-s-knowledge-of-the-past-present-and-future/a-buddha-s-omniscience-of-the-three-times](https://studybuddhism.com/en/advanced-studies/abhidharma-tenet-systems/time-the-universe/a-buddha-s-knowledge-of-the-past-present-and-future/a-buddha-s-omniscience-of-the-three-times).
