+++
title = '[Rant] Five Guys Sucks Ass'
date = '2025-01-13'
math = true
+++
#### Levels 1 & 2

Five Guys is trash. Their burgers are inherently flawed and cannot be good, and I truly believe that almost everyone who swears they enjoy Five Guys has either been fooled by their marketing, is trying to cope and justify them spending $20 on a below-average burger, or they've just never had a decent burger before.

I'm going to start with the fact that it is literally company policy for them [not to season the beef](https://www.fiveguys.com/-/media/public-site/files/allergen-ingredients-and-nutrition-info/allergen-guide/nutrition-allergen-march-2018-us.ashx). Their reasoning is likely along the lines of "we want the quality of the meat to shine." That's absolute horse-shit. They use a standard chuck mince with an 80-20 lean-fat ratio, and that's it. If you cooked me an A5 Wagyu ribeye &mdash; a steak that costs over $100 a pound &mdash; and told me you didn't even salt it, I wouldn't eat it. Nobody who knows anything about cooking would eat it or prepare it that way.

They've also somehow managed to produce patties that are just too thin to be juicy, but too thick to be considered "smashed." Again, another company-standardized technique that reflects the culinary acumen of someone who can't boil water. When your patty is thick enough, you're able to produce a decent sear while not overcooking the inside, creating a flavorful crust on the outside and retaining moisture within. When you **smash** it, you willingly give up much of the moisture content to get the strongest maillard reaction possible: this typically works well with fatty meat, as the fat should still keep the burger juicy to some extent. This **only** works when you smash it **hard**. The patty should be so flat and spread out that it's *almost* fallen apart. Five Guys somehow masterfully manages to find some dry, bland middle ground here.

Every decent burger chain should produce a burger with some distinct character (other than being dry and bland). They usually do this through some house-secret sauce (e.g., Big Mac sauce or Shack Sauce). Five Guys doesn't have this. They have ketchup, mustard, mayo, and a few other sauces you get to choose from. In fact, all of the toppings are up to you. Restaurants that let you "create your own meal" are typically soulless restaurants with chefs that have no pride in their work. Not that I expect Five Guys to have passionate chefs behind the counter; I'm fully aware that, like any other fast food burger chain, it's usually some 15-year-old working shifts after getting out of school. The sin here lies in their branding: from the red checkered walls to the wooden seats, the open kitchens and the countless local awards hung up on the walls, the **consistently** sloppily assembled burgers that come out, and the upside-down burger buns (that, whichever way you turn them, WILL fall apart before you finish your burger) they reuse for their grilled-cheeses, it's clear they want to present themselves as being something between an authentic, well-regarded local spot and your friend's backyard cookout. It's neither. It's a fast-food chain that charges you the price of a high-end diner. Their marketing may not be the most aggressive, but it might just be the most devious. How they overfill those little cups of fries to make you think you're getting more than you paid for, how they label the single-patty burgers as "little burgers" to steer you toward their "standard" double-patty burgers that they charge more than double-patty prices for, how they sell "veggie burgers" that are literally just standard burgers without the patties --- Five Guys should be insulting to anyone who enjoys burgers, and yet so many swear by it.

I'm not going to talk about the health point too much, as it likely makes little difference to most fast food enjoyers, but looking at the calorie counts on the menu blows my mind. From the burgers --- which are rated the [**unhealthiest** fast-food burgers in America](https://www.delish.com/food-news/a62192012/most-unhealthy-fast-food-burger-in-america/) and are all almost double the calories of a Big Mac --- to the large fries that are ***triple*** the calories of the large fries at McDonald's, it's a subpar meal that makes you guilty purchasing it, disappointed while eating it, and feeling like shit after you've finished it.

It's trash. I'd take one of those plain hockey-puck Checkers burgers over a cheeseburger at Five Guys; they'll both taste like shit, but one of them doesn't come to a total of $35.77 (that's not an exaggeration: that's literally the after-tax price of a burger, fries, and a shake at a Five Guys in NYC). The only reason I go to Five Guys at all is for their fries, which I admittedly love, but lack the gall to order alone without some shitty burger to go with it.

I know some glue-eating troglodytes who might respond with "well, that's just YOUR opinion." First of all, we're talking at Levels 1 & 2 here, so go read my [first post](https://maliknyc.github.io/karmagambler.github.io/posts/test-post/) before you think of some lazy, pointless rebuttal. Yes, it's my opinion, and it's an opinion rooted in basic culinary principles and innate human biology. We literally evolved to crave salt because our bodies need it; "it's just my opinion that beef tastes better salted" is the same as "it's just my opinion that waterboarding myself is fun." Saying "it's just my opinion that beef is best dry with no crust" is the same as saying "it's just my opinion that glue tastes good." Sure, they're your opinions, but you shouldn't have made it past natural selection. If we stripped away the red-checkered walls and the homey branding and stuck a Five Guys patty next to a seasoned and decently-prepareed patty from anywhere else, you would not choose the Five guys patty. It's a shitty opinion that Five Guys tastes good, it's a fact that Five Guys is incredibly unhealthy, and it's a fact that Five Guys is incredibly overpriced.